---
title: Does Your Startup Need a Design System? (Probably Not Yet)
description:
  'Should your startup build a design system? Probably not yet. Learn why rigid
  design guidelines slow you down and what to use instead to ship faster while
  finding product-market fit.'
publishedAt: '2025-06-10'
authors: ['eelco']
---

Every startup founder scrolling through design Twitter has seen them: those
gorgeous, meticulously documented design systems from companies like Shopify,
Atlassian, and Airbnb. Component libraries with pixel-perfect spacing,
comprehensive color palettes, and documentation that would make a technical
writer weep with joy.

And then the thought creeps in: "We should probably build one of these."

Here's the thing though – you probably shouldn't. At least not yet.

## The Short Answer: No (For Now)

Design systems are built for scale, not speed. They solve problems that come
with having dozens of designers, hundreds of developers, and products that need
to feel cohesive across multiple teams and platforms. They're optimization tools
for companies that have already found their groove.

Your startup, on the other hand, is still figuring out what product you're
actually building. You're pivoting, iterating, and probably throwing away entire
features every few weeks. In this environment, rigid design guidelines aren't
just unnecessary – they're actively harmful.

Think about it: when you're still discovering what your users actually want, why
would you want to lock yourself into predetermined ways of presenting
information? When you might completely change your user flow next month, why
spend time documenting the "correct" way to build forms?

## Why Design Systems Can Actually Slow You Down

The biggest lie about design systems is that they save time. Sure, they do –
eventually. But the upfront investment is massive, and the ongoing maintenance
is real. Every new component needs documentation. Every edge case needs to be
considered. Every change needs to be propagated across your entire system.

I've watched startup teams spend weeks debating the exact shade of blue for
their primary button while their conversion rates were tanking. I've seen
designers create comprehensive spacing systems for products that were about to
be completely redesigned based on user feedback.

This isn't just theoretical waste – it's opportunity cost. Every hour spent
creating the "perfect" button component is an hour not spent talking to users,
analyzing data, or building the feature that might actually move the needle.

Rigid guidelines also create a different kind of friction: they make
experimentation harder. Want to try a completely different approach to your
checkout flow? Well, first you need to figure out how it fits into your existing
design system. Want to test a bold new visual direction? Better update seventeen
different component specifications first.

## What You Need Instead: An Evolving Component System

Instead of a design system, build a component system. The difference is
philosophical but crucial.

A design system starts with rules and tries to enforce them. A component system
starts with reusable pieces and lets patterns emerge naturally. You build
components as you need them, refactor them when they become unwieldy, and throw
them away when they're no longer useful.

This approach gives you the benefits of consistency (shared components naturally
create visual coherence) without the overhead of formal documentation and
governance. Your button component will evolve based on real usage patterns, not
theoretical edge cases you imagined in a workshop.

### Start with Pre-Built Components (But Keep Them Flexible)

Here's where tools like SaaS UI come in handy. Rather than building everything
from scratch or committing to a full design system, you can start with a
pre-built component library specifically designed for startups and SaaS
products.

SaaS UI gives you professionally designed components out of the box – buttons,
forms, navigation, data tables, and more – without the overhead of creating and
maintaining your own design system. You get the visual consistency and
development speed benefits without having to predict every possible use case or
spend weeks documenting spacing systems.

The key is treating these as a starting point, not a straitjacket. Use the
components as-is when they work perfectly for your needs. Customize them when
you need something slightly different. Fork or replace them entirely when your
product evolves beyond what they can handle.

This approach lets you move fast early on while still maintaining a cohesive
look and feel. You're not starting from a blank slate, but you're also not
locked into someone else's vision of what your product should look like.

Start simple. Use pre-built components where they make sense, build custom ones
where you need them, and let your system evolve organically. When you find
yourself customizing the same component in the same way multiple times, that's
when you know it's time to create your own version.

The key is letting your system grow organically based on actual needs rather
than trying to predict every possible use case upfront. This keeps you flexible
enough to respond quickly to user feedback and market changes while still
maintaining some level of consistency.

## The Magic Number: Under 20 Developers

Here's a rough rule of thumb: if you have fewer than 20 developers, you probably
don't need a formal design system yet.

Why 20? It's around the point where communication overhead starts to exceed the
cost of systematization. When you have 5 developers, they can all talk to each
other daily. They know what everyone is working on, they can coordinate
directly, and inconsistencies are easy to spot and fix.

Once you hit 20+, you start having teams that don't talk to each other
regularly. You have developers joining who don't know the informal conventions.
You have multiple products or features being built simultaneously. This is when
shared systems start to provide real value.

Before that point, the coordination required to maintain a design system – the
meetings, the documentation, the governance – often costs more than the problems
it solves.

## Cross-Functional Teams Change Everything

One of the biggest advantages early-stage startups have is tight collaboration
between designers and developers. When your designer sits next to your front-end
developer (literally or virtually), they can hash out implementation details in
real-time. They can make decisions together, iterate quickly, and maintain
consistency through ongoing communication rather than formal documentation.

This kind of collaboration makes many of the traditional benefits of design
systems less relevant. You don't need detailed specifications when the person
who designed it is sitting right there to answer questions. You don't need
comprehensive documentation when the team is small enough to maintain shared
context.

The magic happens when designers and developers are working together daily, not
when they're coordinating through handoffs and specification documents. Invest
in that collaboration rather than trying to systematize away the need for
communication.

## Code as Your Source of Truth

Here's a controversial take: your components are better documentation than your
documentation.

A well-built React component tells you exactly how it behaves, what props it
accepts, and how it handles different states. It's always up to date because it
literally is the thing being used in production. It can't drift out of sync with
reality because it is reality.

Compare this to traditional design system workflows where you have Figma files
with meticulously defined design tokens, Notion pages documenting spacing
systems, and Confluence wikis explaining component usage – all of which require
constant maintenance to stay accurate. How many times have you seen beautifully
crafted Figma components with perfectly organized token libraries that don't
match what actually shipped? Or design tokens that specify 16px spacing while
the production code uses 15px because "it looked better"?

The problem with maintaining parallel sources of truth is that they inevitably
diverge. Designers update the Figma tokens but forget to tell developers.
Developers tweak the code for a specific use case but don't update the design
file. Before you know it, your "single source of truth" has become three
different sources of conflicting information.

This doesn't mean you should avoid all documentation or abandon Figma entirely –
good prop types, clear component names, and helpful comments are crucial. Visual
design exploration still needs to happen somewhere. But it does mean you should
be skeptical of elaborate token systems and documentation hierarchies that
promise perfect synchronization between design and code.

Instead, prioritize making your code self-documenting and treat your design
files as exploration tools rather than specification documents. When you find a
spacing value that works in production, that becomes the source of truth – not
whatever you originally planned in Figma.

Tools like Storybook can help bridge this gap by automatically generating
component documentation from your actual code, but even then, keep it simple.
Focus on showing what the component does rather than prescribing how it should
be used or maintaining complex token mappings that will inevitably fall out of
sync.

## When to Actually Build a Design System

So when do you actually need a design system? Here are the clear signals:

**You have multiple teams building UI independently.** When teams start shipping
inconsistent experiences because they're not coordinating directly, it's time
for shared standards.

**You're spending significant time on design debt.** If you're regularly having
to go back and make the same visual updates across dozens of screens,
systematization will save time.

**You have new team members regularly.** When onboarding someone new requires
explaining dozens of informal conventions, formal documentation starts to pay
for itself.

**You're building multiple products.** If you want your mobile app to feel
consistent with your web app, you need shared standards that work across
platforms.

**You have dedicated design system resources.** Don't build a design system
unless you have someone whose job it is to maintain it. Orphaned design systems
are worse than no system at all.

Until you hit these markers, resist the urge to formalize. Keep building, keep
learning, and keep iterating. Your design system will be much better when you
actually understand the problems it needs to solve.

## Embrace the Chaos (But With Better Tools)

Early-stage startup development is supposed to be chaotic. You're exploring
unknown territory, testing hypotheses, and learning from users. This process
requires flexibility, experimentation, and the ability to change direction
quickly.

Design systems are tools for bringing order to chaos – but premature order can
kill the creativity and agility that startups need to succeed. The visual
inconsistencies that keep you up at night probably aren't even noticed by your
users, who are much more concerned with whether your product actually solves
their problems.

But that doesn't mean you should start from absolute zero. Using pre-built
component libraries like SaaS UI gives you a middle ground – enough structure to
look professional and move quickly, but enough flexibility to adapt as you learn
what your product needs to be.

Think of it like using a framework versus writing everything from scratch. You
wouldn't build your own web server when Express.js exists, and you probably
shouldn't build your own button components when good ones already exist. Save
your innovation energy for the parts of your product that actually differentiate
you from competitors.

Focus on building something people want first. Worry about systematizing it
later. Your future self, armed with real user data and a clearer product vision,
will build a much better design system than your current self trying to predict
the future.

The most successful startups I know spent their early days moving fast and
breaking things, not documenting the proper way to break them. They used
whatever tools helped them ship faster – including pre-built component libraries
– and saved the custom design system for when they had found something worth
systematizing.

## Ready to Ship Faster?

If you're convinced that pre-built components are the way to go (and you should
be), then you need tools built specifically for this approach. SaaS UI gives you
everything we've talked about in this post: professional components that evolve
with your product, flexibility to customize without rebuilding from scratch, and
the speed to focus on what actually differentiates your startup.

Stop spending weeks building basic UI components. Stop maintaining design token
libraries that drift out of sync. Start shipping features that matter to your
users. Get SaaS UI and build your MVP faster than your competitors can document
their button specifications.

[Explore components](/components)
